Introduction post (#14)
metriql/metriql.com: blog/2021-07-17-introducing-metriql.md

---
slug: introducing-metriql
title: Introducing metriql
author: Burak Kabakci
author_title: Core Team
author_url: https://github.com/buremba
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/82745
tags: [announcement]
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

Metric definitions is a hot topic most people are talking about lately. Ben has written [The missing piece of the modern data stack](https://benn.substack.com/p/metrics-layer) and Basecamp came up with the [Headless BI](https://basecase.vc/blog/headless-bi) concept in the last few months.

We have been also giving careful thoughts to this particular problem for a while. The way we think about metrics is not just about the definitions, instead, a better integration between data tools and data warehouses. Most companies already use a modern data warehouse and have adopted the data warehouse as the single source of truth. They ingest data in real-time, run ELT jobs directly in their data warehouse, run ad-hoc queries and get the results in low-latency, and even run ML jobs on them.

> If you’re using a data transformation tool such as dbt, you can model your data and expose it to your data tools but that’s not often enough for the data tools, we often found ourselves doing extra data modeling in data tools for metric definitions. This is primarily because most of the data tools introduce different ways to define metrics and you need to adopt it to be able to analyze the data reliably. Let's categorize the metric types under 3 category:

Reviewer: Let's categorize the metric types under 3 category: Burda bir aciklama lazim gibi geliyor, bir onceki paragrafta neden categorize etmeye gectik onu anlayamadim? metric type bir de doğrular mu?

Author: bu article icin bi tik teknik mi kaciyo bunlar yoksa oncesine soyle bisey ekleyebilirim:

In order to demonstrate the usual workflow of current BI tools, let's talk about three different metric types that we identified:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’re using a data transformation tool such as dbt, you can model your data and expose it to your data tools but that’s not often enough for the data tools, we often found ourselves doing extra data modeling in data tools for metric definitions. This is primarily because most of the data tools introduce different ways and languages to define metrics and you need to adopt it to be able to analyze the data reliably using these tools. There are 3 main metric definition types that we've seen in most companies we've worked with, let me explain what they are and how they're defined differently in each BI tool:
```

### Aggregate measures
In most cases, you usually have a numeric column in your database and define a metric with aggregation functions such as SUM, COUNT, or AVERAGE. If you use Tableau to analyze your sales data, you usually connect it to a table in your data warehouse that has a `Number of Sales` column, use Tableau’s [SUM](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/calculations_aggregation.htm) function to define a default aggregation for that column and slice & dice the data. If your business stakeholders (usually the finance people in this case) don't know about the Tableau expressions, you need to create a workbook manually on behalf of them every time you change the data model. Even if you use the [SUM](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_count_avg_sum.asp) function in ANSI SQL, Tableau doesn’t recognize it and you need to search and use the appropriate Tableau aggregate function to define the metric. 

### Non-aggregate measures
As your data model gets more advanced, you start to calculate the metrics such as LTV, and CAC. Customer acquisition cost usually defined as follows:

```
[Total Expenses Metric] / [Total Customers Metric]
```

> If you use SQL to define this metric in your data model, you can’t just use an aggregation function such as SUM to calculate this metric. Instead, it should be calculated on the fly directly from your visualization tool from the source data. That’s why Tableau has [calculations](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/calculations_calculatedfields_lod.htm), Metabase has [custom expressions](https://www.metabase.com/learn/questions/custom-expressions), PowerBI has [DAX](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/power-bi/transform-model/desktop-quickstart-learn-dax-basics). SQL is not enough anymore even though you can write the same expression in SQL, you need to learn these custom expression languages to be able to define your metrics, usually using their GUI.

Reviewer: Instead, it should be calculated on the fly directly from your visualization tool from the source data  ( from from dogru mu?)

Author: directly from visualization tool pek dogru degil, in ad-hoc SQL query for the report that you're generating olabilir.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use SQL to define this metric in your data model, you can’t just use an aggregation function such as SUM to calculate this metric. Instead, it should be calculated on the fly directly in an ad-hoc SQL query for the report you're generating. That’s why Tableau has [calculations](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/calculations_calculatedfields_lod.htm), Metabase has [custom expressions](https://www.metabase.com/learn/questions/custom-expressions), PowerBI has [DAX](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/power-bi/transform-model/desktop-quickstart-learn-dax-basics). SQL is not enough anymore even though you can write the same expression in SQL, you need to learn these custom expression languages to be able to define your metrics, usually using their GUI.
```

1. Teach everyone SQL and have a company-wide documentation for your data.
2. Hire a data team, collect all the company data into a data warehouse, model the data for business requirements and expose the data to the business stakeholders using their preferred tools.

It's not realistic to expect every company to have the luxury to teach SQL to all their stakeholders. Many departments such as product, marketing, and finance have different sets of priorities and responsibilities and don't have [time](https://twitter.com/sethrosen/status/1363327369726074880) to invest in learning SQL. If you go with the latter approach, you usually need to use an ELT provider such as Fivetran, Stitch, etc. and adopt a data transformation tool such as dbt or Airflow for your company or stick with the data transformation features of your BI tool. You usually have the following two options with BI:

##### Go through the sales process and buy an enterprise product such as Tableau, PowerBI, etc.:

* Advantages
    * Powerful visualization

>     * Ability to analyze the data much faster if your data source is slow

Reviewer: Ability to analyze the data much faster if your data source is slow - by extracting the data olarak mi diyorsun?
Bu enterprise BI in altına oluyor mu looker da girer diyoruz çünkü asagida enterprise Bi a

Author: Looker yapmiyo bunu haklisin, oraya bi not ekleyecegim. Extracting data kismini da eklesek iyi olur anlam daha gucleniyo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Ability to analyze the data much faster by extracting the data if your data source is slow
```

metriql is an open-source project that lets you define your company metrics as code in a single central metric repository using dbt and later let you sync the data models to all your data tools at once.

metriql sits between your data-warehouse and the data tools. It doesn’t have its query engine, instead leverages your existing data warehouse. While it has a REST API, it’s often not enough. A more tight integration was required for the BI tools so we built MQL, a SQL dialect for your metriql datasets. We have native integrations with multiple tools such as Google Sheets and Google Data Studio and use Trino-interface for some others such as Looker & Tableau.

If you don't have a standardized way of sharing the data across your organization and tools, each team ends up introducing their own way of understanding the data and it gets messy and painful to maintain and this bears discussions like: [self serve is a problem](https://benn.substack.com/p/self-serve-still-a-problem). Our goal is to contribute to the solution of this self-serve problem by working on standardization of the metric definition and distribution.

> What we came to understanding of by working with data-driven and succesful companies in the past years is that they use the right tool for the right, they don't try to force one tool to fit all use cases. BI tools are now the front-end of your data and your business stakeholders should have the option to choose any front-end depending on their preferences and needs. While the Headless BI concept is relatively new and still in the early stages, it has many use-cases that saves the data teams time just like how dbt started to replace data transformation within the BI tools. Happy and excited to be one of the first companies in this space! 🤞

Reviewer: it has many use-cases that save the data teams time just like how dbt started to replace data transformation within the BI tools. 
Burda how dbt saved data teams time by replacing data transformation withing BI tools mu demek istiyorsun yoksa baska bir sey mi kast ediyorsun?

Author: aynen dedigini kastediyorum

> What we came to understanding of by working with data-driven and succesful companies in the past years is that they use the right tool for the right, they don't try to force one tool to fit all use cases. BI tools are now the front-end of your data and your business stakeholders should have the option to choose any front-end depending on their preferences and needs. While the Headless BI concept is relatively new and still in the early stages, it has many use-cases that save data teams time just like how dbt saves time by replacing the data transformation within BI tools. Happy and excited to be one of the first companies in this space! 🤞

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What we learned by working with data-driven and successful companies in the past years is that they use the right tool for the right job, they don't try to force one tool to fit all use cases. Today, BI tools are the front-end of companies' data and teams want to be able to choose and use any front-end depending on their use case without worrying about vendor lock-in. While the Headless BI concept is relatively new and still in the early stages, it has many use cases which save data teams time and let them sync their data models to any data tool that their stakeholders and teams want to use. Happy and excited to be one of the first companies in this space! 🤞
```
